Project Documentation - Batarang

The first step in designing a 3D model is to know what you’re going to design. After seeing the trailer for Injustice 2, I decided I wanted to design the Batarang from it. Of course, however, it is not released and they have not released the concept art or art book, so I have to work from just a still image at an off-angle. So the next step was to draw up a plan and have it scaled relatively close to what I want. So I drew it up.
I was working in Blender, the 3D modelling software. This offers the option of loading in a   drawing or picture to work from. You can do this by pressing the “n” keyboard shortcut to open your toolbar, scrolling to the bottom where “background image” is, and checking it. Then select your image. The workings of Blender are often odd at first, and this is no different; you can only view the image in “ortho mode”. When viewing a 3D model, it is… well .. 3D. Points further away look smaller, things closer look bigger, etc. Ortho mode changes this, making it so everything is the same size, distance excluded. This makes working with objects much easier. To enter this, you hit “5” on the numpad. But you can only see your images from direct views; direct top, bottom or sides. To do this, you hit “7” for top view, or “4” for side view, both on the numpad. (The numbers at the top do different things.) To recap, load your image, press “7” for top view, then “5” for ortho mode, and you can see your object.
Next comes the hard part; making something to work from. I often find it the easiest to place my own vertices in the shape of the object instead of trying to manipulate a cylinder or cube into any shape. Blender automatically adds a cube at the beginning of every project, but we’ll use it for a second. I also find it easiest to only make half the object, center it on the “x” or “y” axis, then just mirror it over. To add your own vertices; take an object, such as this cube, and hit “tab”. This brings you into “edit mode”, where you edit individual vertices and edges, instead of a whole object. Hit “a” twice to highlight all the vertices, press “x” to delete and a prompt will appear, press ‘vertices’ instead of edges and the entire object should be gone. Again, make sure you’re in top view (7) and ortho mode (5). To manually add vertices, you’re going to hold “ctrl” and “c”, then left click where you would like the vertices. Make the outline of your object, in this case I outlined my batarang design. Once done, connect the two end vertices by holding “shift” and right-clicking both the vertices, then press “f” to connect them. Then press “a” twice to highlight all of them, then press “f” to create a face between them, a solid plane in the shape of the vertices. Now I have a flat Batarang. I also deleted the image to work from at this point; I stupidly used orange paper to draw on, and Blender uses a gray background with your selected objects or points as orange, so it made it really hard to see.
Next I gave my plane-Batarang depth by pressing “e” (extrude). I raise it to give it depth, and then try to scale it to create that sort of edge-look like a blade would have. This was difficult because scaling works from a center point, not groups of vertices. Meaning the sharp points on the edges scaled in, and lowered on the y axis. Meaning it got weird shapes and messed-up areas. I then went through and manually moved each one to where I wanted them. This looked alright. 
Then came the worst part; this model of Batarang has these raised areas in the middle of the wings (I imagine for extra weight?). I had to manually add extra vertices by following the steps before and creating new edges, faces, heights, etc. This was a chore and a half. When creating the faces between points however, I could not get what I wanted; it kept looking like crap and when trying to render the model, it kept creating weird gaps, edges, valleys and points in my my model. This is due to how Blender actually creates edges and faces, and the “normals” of the certives. Imagine normals as settings for an individual vertex. As counter-intuitive as it sounds, each vertex has settings associated with it more than just an x,y,z location. They also have directions they face, directions they should connect, and so much more. The point is, when adding points manually and moving them all over, these normals get messed up and have to be recalculated. It’s easy to do, just highlight all vertices and hit “ctrl + n” to recalculate. Cool, now the vertices are right, but Blender can’t make it too easy. The edges and faces it makes are still off. This isn’t a problem like the flipped normals. This can’t be solved with a keyboard shortcut, it’s just how Blender works, and I’m trying to make it work in a way it literally can’t.


So after a few days of trying to force it to work, I decided I would start over, give it proper-normalized vertices (just to make it easier) and try a different method of building it up, not trying to go against the workings of Blender (now that I realize how it works). So I deleted the entire top part, leaving just the plane of vertices in the shape of half-a-batarang. I actually went through, moving these to where I wanted, then deleted them  in chunks and placed new ones that connected correctly. So in a while, I had a new plane of half-a-batarang with new normals that were actually correct from the start. Nice. 
This time instead of extruding and scaling for the edges, I I added one central point at the highest point of the raise. I connected this to points I knew I needed as the edges, then divided the edges into points and moved them, making a very articulated edge of gradual decline at the proper height, instead of adding points and guessing where I needed them. This make very nice edges to work from. I did this several times, for each edge. Then came the hard part again, the inside curve of the edge. Creating edges and faces on this weird, angled surface is what caused all of the problems before. Instead of highlighting the ring of vertices and trying to make a face, I had to go through and make new edges between the top and bottom rings, then connect those edges’ vertices to create a grid-looking face. This worked and actually looked much nicer in rendered mode and even the edit-mode model. It looks cleaner and like an actual object. I repeated this as many times as there are edges and made it look pretty decent.
I mirrored the Batarang into a whole one by going to the modifier tab on the right, and adding the mirror modifier on the y axis. I also checked clipping and joining. Now I have a whole Batarang instead of a half.
Finally, there is a hole in the center of the Batarang for Kryptonite to be slotted in (Bats and Supes aren’t getting along well…). To do this I took a cylinder and cut it out of the Batarang by highlighting the Batarang, adding a modifier called Boolean and setting it to difference, then selecting the cylinder and applied it. Now there's a hole in it. But i want that little ring edge. So I made a new cylinder and repeated the steps to cut a cylinder out of a cylinder, making a ring. I scaled it up and down and when it was the right size I joined it to the Batarang by pressing “ctrl-j”.
And that was it. I then exported the model as an .stl which is what I use for printing. Slice. Print. Stab myself really bad with a paint scraper trying to remove it from the bed. And woolah.

